### Motivation and Purpose
The World Bank describes transport as a [crucial driver of economic and social development, bringing opportunities for the poor and enabling economies to be more competitive](https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/transport/overview). Transportation safety is thus a matter of great public concern for all modes of transportation. Understanding the factors that influence passenger safety can promote better desgin of vehicles, vessels and other means of transportation, and lead to the implementation of more effective and equitable transportation policies, rules and regulations that increase the safety of all passengers in an equitable manner, especially in the event of serious accidents with high risk of fatalities. We propose to build a data visualization dashboard that allows stakeholders to visually interact with a dataset of passenger survival counts for a given means of transportation. Our first analysis of passenger survival data from the sinking of the Titanic in 1912 will allow users to explore the relationship between survival and passenger cabin class and location.

### Description of the Data
We will be visualizing a dataset of 1,309 passengers from the Titanic. Each passenger has 14 related factors. For our first research question, we are interested in the survival (`survived`) rates of passengers based on their cabin class and location (`pclass`, `cabin`) and propose follow-on research to study the relationship between survival rates as passenger demographic information (`name`, `age`, `gender`) which will be presented on the dashboard, but not analyzed for this initial exploratory analysis.   

Each passenger cabin has three possible classes (`pclass`): 1st class, 2nd class, and 3rd class. The "cabin" column represents the location of the passenger in terms of deck and room number. For example, a passenger in cabin A22 is in room 22 on Deck A. "Survived" is a binary variable indicating that the passenger either survived or did not survive. 


### Research questions and usage scenarios
This dashboard will address one exploratory research question: Is there a relationship between cabin location of passengers and their survival rates on the Titanic which can help inform ship design and safety policies?

Potential users of our app are passenger vessel designers and policymakers for maritime safety who have a mutual interest in increasing ship safety and reducing the risk of fatalities when accidents occur. Using our app, these stakeholders will be able to make an initial visual assessment of the relatonship between the survival rates of passengers and the respective class and deck location of their cabins. For example, if it is observed that cabins of one class or on particular deck levels have lower survival rates, a ship designer could explore ways to improve the accessibility of these cabins (e.g. stairways) to allow passengers to more quickly reach the lifeboats on the main deck level taking into account passenger flow dynamics during an emergency including the presence or absence of water, light and sound. Similarly, a policymaker drawing the same initial conclusion after using our app could draft legislation that ensures all passengers are able to access a lifeboat within a specified window of time regardless of their cabin class and deck level, and then work with designers to implement objective measures to test compliance to the standard.

